

# Door Controller Raspberry Pi Software Technical Summary

* Synopsis
* Operation
* Installation
* Development Guidelines

## Synopsis

The door controller relies on the Raspberry Pi to implement access control
policy by authenticating users.  It holds an access list contained in a
card key file.  The `hodor_watcher` program reads keys scanned from an
attached RFID reader and grants or denies access based on the contents
of the card key file.  The `hodor_watcher` program also records scans and
access decisions in event files to allow other programs to recognize and
respond to door activity.

A second program `hodor_slacker` uses the event files generated by
`hodor_watcher`.  It polls for new event files and sends chat messages
to a designated channel on Slack.

## Operation

### Card Key File

To operate properly, the system requires a file with list of card ID numbers
to accept.

The card key file is named `bw_cardkey.csv` and lives in the directory `/home/pi`.
The card key file is CSV formatted and requires that the first line read as
follows:
```
    KEY,NAME,ALLOW
```
This first line is a header row identifying the fields expected in the lines to follow.
Each line after the first contains information for a single card.

The definitions of the columns named first line are as follows:

* The `KEY` column is the ID number for a card to be accepted.
* The `NAME` column is the name of the user who owns the given card.
* The `ALLOW` column indicates whether a user is allowed access.  To allow a
card ID to be accepted for entry, the letter `y` should be put in this column.
Other values imply denial of entry.

So a simple card key file might look like this:
```
    KEY,NAME,ALLOW
    12-34-56-12-34-56,Jane Doe,y
    13-13-13-13-13-13,Herman Munster,n
```
The above key card would recognize two users, but only allow "Jane Doe" access.
If "Herman Munster" used his card, his name would be recognized but he would be
denied access and the denial would be recorded in the log.  The `ALLOW` column
is intended for several scenarios.  It allows for temporary suspension of access
in cases where--for example--a member's subscription is unpaid.  It also is
provided so lost and stolen cards can be recognized where the name can be
kept in the record but not accepted for access, so when lost and stolen cards
are scanned the previous owner can be identified.

### hodor_controller Operation

On a Raspberry Pi the `hodor_controller` program monitors the Raspberry Pi serial port
for RFID card ID's scanned by an external receiver device and compares it against
a local file `bw_cardkey.csv`.  The file is re-read each time a card is scanned
so the card ID list can be updated and the `hodor_controller` program will
automatically accept new ID's without requiring a restart or other intervention.
Access is granted by activating GPIO16 (assert high).  As card ID's are
scanned, messages are written to a log file and to an `events` directory
to be read by `hodor_slackbot`.

The messages in the `events` directory are formatted as simple JSON files.
Each file contains a single JSON object with a single key named `message`,
the value of which is a text string to be posted to a Slack channel.

### hodor_slacker Operation

The `hodor_slackbot` program reads a configuration file (YAML-formatted,
normally in `/home/pi/.hodor_slacker_config.yml`) and watches the `events`
directory for messages.  As messages appear, they are read in sorting order
and posted to the slack channel per the configuration file.

## Software Installation

### Deploying with Ansible

The [Ansible](http://www.ansible.com) playbook in the `deploy_ansible` directory can be used to install the programs onto a new Raspberry Pi.  The details of their integration and operation on the Pi are described in the following section.

To use the contents of the `deploy_ansible` directory, one should have Python version 3 (version 3.6 or later) installed.  Running the deployment system will perform a project-local installation of Ansible to run the deployment.  

### Preparing for Playbook Use

As a prerequisite to using the playbook, one should prepare an OpenSSH key pair and install the public key on the target Raspberry Pi in `/home/pi/.ssh/authorized_keys`.

The next thing Ansible needs to perform a deployment is the name or address of the machine where the installation is to be performed.  To do this one should copy the example configuration to `inv.yml`, which is the inventory file name expected by the Makefile driving the deployment process:
```
    cp example_inventory.yml inv.yml
```
and edit the line that reads "`example.com:`" and replace `example.com` to match the name of the intended target machine.

### Running the Install

Once the aforementioned preparations are complete, one should be able to perform an installation simply by typing:
```
    make
```
The deployment process will prepare itself by creating a project-local Python environment, installing Ansible into it, then running the ansible playbook in `hodor_base_playbook.yml`.

### Hodor Working Directory

The working files for running `hodor_watcher` and `hodor_slacker` are contained
in a single directory (`/home/pi/hodor` by default) organized as follows:

```
    /home/pi/hodor
    ├── bw_cardkey.csv
    ├── events
    │   ├── *.event
    ├── example_bw_cardkey.csv
    ├── log
    │   ├── hodor_run_slacker.log
    │   ├── hodor_run_watcher.log
    │   ├── hodor_slacklog.log
    │   └── hodor_watcher.log
    └── scripts
        ├── run_hodor_slacker.sh
        └── run_hodor_watcher.sh
```
At the top level of this directory tree are the files `bw_cardkey.csv` and
`example_bw_cardkey.csv`, dropped by the installer.  `example_bw_cardkey.csv`
is always rewritten, but if `bw_cardkey.csv` already exists the installer
does not overwrite it, so that any user edits are preserved.  `bw_cardkey.csv`
provides a small example access list to help get the user started, but the
user is expected to replace this with an access list of their own making.

Inside of this directory three subdirectories are created:
* `events` - event files created by `hodor_watcher` to allow other programs
to monitor door activity.
* `log` - log files
* `scripts` - contains the wrapper scripts used to run the programs under `systemd`

### System Integration and Support

The installer configures service files under `systemd` to run `hodor_watcher`
and `hodor_slacker`, which ensures that the programs are started on boot
and are restarted in case of errors.  The service files `hodor-watcher.service`
and `hodor-slacker.service` may be found in `/etc/systemd/system`.

The file `/etc/logrotate.d/hodor` is installed to rotate the log files in
the log directory (`/home/pi/log` by default) using `logrotate`.

The event files written by `hodor_watcher` are managed by a cron job installed
into `/etc/cron.daily/hodor-cullevents` to prevent them from filling the
filesystem.

## Development Guidelines

### Developing and Testing off the Pi

One can work on the code locally off of a Raspberry Pi by running the scripts
in the local repository.

One can run the programs locally using:
```
    python3 hodor_controller/watcher.py

    python3 hodor_slackbox/hodor_slacker.py
```
The software includes a unit test suite that tests the application logic
without requiring a Raspberry Pi or connected hardware.  
The dependencies required for running the test suite are provided by
the project environment created in `deploy_ansible/projenv/bin/activate`.   
To run the test suite, one can run:
```
    python3 unit_test_suite.py
```
Alternatively, one can install and test the codes using `setup.py`:
```
    python3 setup.py develop

    python3 setup.py test
```
